README.md, before:

# Bazel external workspace override behavior

Bazel supports the import of external workspaces. Each imported workspace is
given a name by which its build targets can be referenced from the main
workspace.

It thus can happen that two different workspaces are imported under the same
name, and then the question arises which workspace actually appears under this
name.

There are two rules that govern this situation:

1. The last imported workspace becomes available to the main workspace,
   according to the documentation.

2. It is an error to import a workspace under an already existing name *after* a
   `load()` statement was executed in the target workspace, according to the
   error message that `bazel` gives when this is attempted.

## Problems

The rules as given above can be observed using the `local_repository()`
workspace rule. However, the rules are violated by the `http_archive()`
repository rule, for reasons that are not obvious, and that lead to workspace
composition that is difficult to comprehend and reason about.

What is observed for `http_archive()` rules instead:

1. Even after the `load()` statement that loads the `http_archive()` or even
   `load()` statements that load other functions, multiple `http_archive()`
   rules for the same name *can* be loaded without error. In many such cases,
   the *last* loaded instance becomes effective.

2. However, there *are* situations in which it's not the *last* workspace loaded
   that becomes effective. This happens if other `load()` statements than the
   one for `http_archive()` appear *after* an `http_archive()` call. In that
   case, the last such workspace of a given name becomes effective.

3. In those situations, the remaining workspaces are *silently* not loaded,
   without causing an error or even any indication.

## Demonstration

The problems above are demonstrated in a series of workspaces in this
repository.

Each main workspace is called `main_<id>`. Each main workspace imports three
external workspaces `external_{1,2,3}` all under the workspace name `external`,
in various configurations.

Each external workspace defines the build target `//:note`, which is a genrule
for a document `note.txt` that contains the full name of the external workspace,
i.e. one of `external_{1,2,3}`.

Thus, by executing `bazel build @external//:note` and then inspecting the
content of the file `bazel-bin/external/external/note.txt`, it is easily
possible to observe which of the three external workspaces was actually imported
under the name `@external`.

The setup and observations are each descibed in a comment in the `WORKSPACE`
files of the `main_*` workspaces.

# Appendix

## Bazel error message

The error message can be reproduced by workspace [main_B](main_B/WORKSPACE) in
this repository:

```
mesch@macswell ~/pro/bazel_workspace_override/main_B $ bazel build @external//:note
Starting local Bazel server and connecting to it...
ERROR: Traceback (most recent call last):
	File "/Users/mesch/pro/bazel_workspace_override/main_B/WORKSPACE", line 26, column 17, in <toplevel>
		local_repository(
Error in local_repository: Cannot redefine repository after any load statement in the WORKSPACE file (for repository 'extern')
ERROR: error loading package 'external': Package 'external' contains errors
INFO: Elapsed time: 1.307s
INFO: 0 processes.
FAILED: Build did NOT complete successfully (0 packages loaded)
```

Commit message:

Document the found bug report on bazel.

README.md, after:

# Bazel external workspace override behavior

Bazel supports the import of external workspaces. Each imported workspace is
given a name by which its build targets can be referenced from the main
workspace.

It thus can happen that two different workspaces are imported under the same
name, and then the question arises which workspace actually appears under this
name.

There are two rules that govern this situation:

1. The last imported workspace becomes available to the main workspace,
   according to the documentation.

2. It is an error to import a workspace under an already existing name *after* a
   `load()` statement was executed in the target workspace, according to the
   error message that `bazel` gives when this is attempted.

## Problems

The rules as given above can be observed using the `local_repository()`
workspace rule. However, the rules are violated by the `http_archive()`
repository rule, for reasons that are not obvious, and that lead to workspace
composition that is difficult to comprehend and reason about.

What is observed for `http_archive()` rules instead:

1. Even after the `load()` statement that loads the `http_archive()` or even
   `load()` statements that load other functions, multiple `http_archive()`
   rules for the same name *can* be loaded without error. In many such cases,
   the *last* loaded instance becomes effective.

2. However, there *are* situations in which it's not the *last* workspace loaded
   that becomes effective. This happens if other `load()` statements than the
   one for `http_archive()` appear *after* an `http_archive()` call. In that
   case, the last such workspace of a given name becomes effective.

3. In those situations, the remaining workspaces are *silently* not loaded,
   without causing an error or even any indication.

## Demonstration

The problems above are demonstrated in a series of workspaces in this
repository.

Each main workspace is called `main_<id>`. Each main workspace imports three
external workspaces `external_{1,2,3}` all under the workspace name `external`,
in various configurations.

Each external workspace defines the build target `//:note`, which is a genrule
for a document `note.txt` that contains the full name of the external workspace,
i.e. one of `external_{1,2,3}`.

Thus, by executing `bazel build @external//:note` and then inspecting the
content of the file `bazel-bin/external/external/note.txt`, it is easily
possible to observe which of the three external workspaces was actually imported
under the name `@external`.

The setup and observations are each descibed in a comment in the `WORKSPACE`
files of the `main_*` workspaces.

## Why this is relevant

We use overrides of workspaces in order to align the version of the same
transitive dependencies of different external workspaces. We used to do this by
loading the same workspaces at different versions after the execution of
`*_deps()` functions from those workspaces. This worked, until we moved the
loading of the external workspaces and their `*_deps()` files out of the
`WORKSPACE` into separate `.bzl` files. When we did this, the overrides got
silently dropped, because the overrides got inadvertently moved to after a
`load()` statement, because we were not aware of the restriction and relied on
the override documentation saying last import wins.

## Bug report filed

Turns out a [bug](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/4865) was filed
years ago against bazel about the `git_repository()` rule, which behaves the
same way.

## Workaround

It seems the solution is to always move the overrides before the `load()` call,
not merely the invocation, of the `*_deps()` functions of external
workspaces. This way, we would not even rely on the `*_deps()` function checking
for the presence of the
repository. ([Comment](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel/issues/4865#issuecomment-1055047211)
on the bug above.)

# Appendix

## Bazel error message

The error message can be reproduced by workspace [main_B](main_B/WORKSPACE) in
this repository:

```
mesch@macswell ~/pro/bazel_workspace_override/main_B $ bazel build @external//:note
Starting local Bazel server and connecting to it...
ERROR: Traceback (most recent call last):
	File "/Users/mesch/pro/bazel_workspace_override/main_B/WORKSPACE", line 26, column 17, in <toplevel>
		local_repository(
Error in local_repository: Cannot redefine repository after any load statement in the WORKSPACE file (for repository 'extern')
ERROR: error loading package 'external': Package 'external' contains errors
INFO: Elapsed time: 1.307s
INFO: 0 processes.
FAILED: Build did NOT complete successfully (0 packages loaded)
```
